Concept: Prometheus custom metrics (#673)
kyma-project/community: concepts/observability-custom-metrics/README.md

The easiest way to let the customer monitor her worloads would be lifting the restrictions of Kyma Prometheus. However, in this case it's quite hard to guarantee its stability.

One problem that can occur is so called cardinality explosion when the time series count grows because of high-cardinality labels. A good example is metrics exposed by Istio when elastic workloads scale up and down. Another very common use case is bad code deploys that stuff high-cardinality data (request IDs, timestamps, user-provided values, etc.) into one or more labels of one or more metrics.

A cardinality explosion causes the following problems:

* Increases Prometheus memory consumption, which can eventually lead to be OOM-killed
* Increases scrape durations
* Querying becomes effectively impossible

Monitoring and preventing cardinality explosion is not an easy task. There is a project called [Bomb Squad](https://github.com/open-fresh/bomb-squad), which detects high-cardinality metrics and silences them by rewriting the scrpae config.
However, it's an alpha project and is, in fact, abandoned. 

### Pros

> * Easy to set up - just expose some Kyma Prometheus Operator features to end users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Easy to set up - just expose some Kyma Prometheus Operator features to end users.
```

### Cons

> * Since Prometheus Operator does not support annotation-based discovery of services, its CRD-based API (PodMonitor or ServiceMonitor) has to be exposed to end users. It is very flexible, but requires from end users advanced knowledge of Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Since Prometheus Operator does not support annotation-based discovery of services, its CRD-based API (Pod Monitor or Service Monitor) has to be exposed to end users. It is very flexible, but requires advanced knowledge of Prometheus.
```
I think Pod Monitor and Service Monitor are CRD. According to our [guides](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/blob/main/docs/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology.md#capitalized-terms) should be written in natural language

> * Since the Prometheus config is under control of Kyma Prometheus Operator, it's not possible to use cardinality prevention alike Bomb Squad

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Since the Prometheus configuration is controlled by Kyma Prometheus Operator, it's not possible to use cardinality prevention, such as Bomb Squad.
```

> * Hard to guarantee Kyma monitoring stability since custom metrics will be pulled by the same Prometheus instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Hard to guarantee Kyma monitoring stability since custom metrics will be pulled by the same Prometheus instance.
```

## Separate plain Prometheus

Deploy a plain (non-operated) Prometheus server instance. Scraping custom workloads can be enabled by setting the following Pod annotations: 
```yaml
annotations:
  prometheus.io/scheme: "https"
  prometheus.io/scrape: "true"
  prometheus.io/path: $(PROMETHEUS_METRICS_PATH)
  prometheus.io/port: $(PROMETHEUS_METRICS_PORT)
```

> Dividing Prometheus into Kyma Prometheus and Custom Worload Prometheus has a lot of advantages. However, we still have to let end users monitor Custom Workload Prometheus's stability and raise alerts if it hits the limits. We also have to suppress high cardinality metrics scraping (e.g. by using something similar to Bomb Squad)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dividing Prometheus into Kyma Prometheus and Custom Workload Prometheus has a lot of advantages. However, we still have to let end users monitor Custom Workload Prometheus's stability and raise alerts if it hits the limits. We also have to suppress high cardinality metrics scraping (for example, by using something similar to Bomb Squad)
```

It makes sense to use a shared Grafana that queries both Prometheus instances. It is possible to achieve it without making any changes in the Grafana configuration, just by adding a custom datasource.

### How to test it?

```bash
kubectl apply -f assets/simple-prometheus-setup.yaml # deploy Prometheus server and make it a Kyma Grafana datasource

> kubectl apply -f assets/workloads.yaml               # deploy a custom worload that exposes metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl apply -f assets/workloads.yaml               # deploy a custom workload that exposes metrics
```

kubectl apply -f assets/dashboard.yaml               # deploy Grafana dashboard
```

### Pros

> * Separating Kyma Prometheus, which is fully under our control, from Custom Worload Prometheus. In this setup, Kyma Prometheus remains unaffected by custom metrics hitting scraping limits, having high-cardinality, etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Separating Kyma Prometheus, which is fully under the user control, from Custom Workload Prometheus. In this setup, Kyma Prometheus remains unaffected by custom metrics hitting scraping limits, having high cardinality, etc.
```
by our you meant user, correct?

> * Enabling metric scraping is can easily achieved by setting a set of annotations. In theory, it is possible to wtite a simple mutating webhook server to add those annotations automatically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enabling metric scraping is easily achieved by setting a set of annotations. In theory, it is possible to write a simple mutating webhook server to add those annotations automatically.
```

### Cons

> * Limited configuration flexibility (e.g. comparing to ServiceMonitors). According to the [official documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#relabel_config), it's only possible to set scrape interval and scrape timeout on a per target basis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Limited configuration flexibility (for example, comparing to Service Monitors). According to the [official documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#relabel_config), it's only possible to set scrape interval and scrape timeout on a per target basis.
```

> * Second Prometheus instance needs additional cluster resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Second Prometheus instance needs additional cluster resources.
```

> ## Separate operated Prometheus (using Kyma Prometheus Operator)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Separately operated Prometheus (using Kyma Prometheus Operator)
```

> Use Kyma Prometheus Operator to deploy a second Prometheus instance. However, this approach combines disadvantages from both above-mentioned approaches: complex API and hard to prevent cardinality explosion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Kyma Prometheus Operator to deploy a second Prometheus instance. However, this approach combines disadvantages from both previously mentioned approaches: complex API and hard to prevent cardinality explosion.
```

## Separate Prometheus Operator

> Similar argumentation as above. In addition to that, more cluster resources will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to previous argumentation. In addition to that, more cluster resources will be used.
```

### Conclusions 

Taking all pros and cons into account, Prometheus Operator-based setups do not suit our needs due to the following reasons:

> * Unnessesarily complex API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Unnecessarily complex API.
```

> * Enabling Prometheus Operator means exposing all its features, many of those customers do not need (e.g. ThanosRuler)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enabling Prometheus Operator means exposing many features not needed by the users (for example, ThanosRuler).
```

> * Not possible to implement cardinality explosion prevention, since the scrape config is controlled by the operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Not possible to implement cardinality explosion prevention, since the scrape configuration is controlled by the operator.
```

> * In the long-run we want to drop Kyma Prometheus Operator in favor of plain Prometheus as a more lightweight alternative. It will also decrase chart maintenance costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the long run we want to drop Kyma Prometheus Operator in favor of plain Prometheus as a more lightweight alternative. It also decreases chart maintenance costs.
```

> On the other hand, we want to keep Kyma monitoring separate from customer workload monitoring to ensure its stability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, we want to keep Kyma monitoring separate from the user workload monitoring to ensure its stability.
```

It still makes sense to keep all dashboards in one place, which means opening Kyma Grafana to the users.

It means that the separate plain Prometheus setup is the way to go.

### Questions to answer

* How to integrate alertmanager?
* Investigate what it means to open Kyma dashboard performance-wise (how many dashboards customer can create, etc.)

> * Try out the Bomb Squad approach to prevent Prometheus from crashing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Try out the Bomb Squad approach to prevent Prometheus from crashing.
```
